<!-- page:1 -->

Small Batch Size Training for Language Models:
When Vanilla SGD Works, and Why Gradient
Accumulation Is Wasteful
Martin Marek
New York University
martin.m@nyu.edu
Sanae Lotfi
New York University
Aditya Somasundaram
Columbia University
Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University
Micah Goldblum
Columbia University
Abstract
Conventional wisdom dictates that small batch sizes make language model pretrain-
ing and fine-tuning unstable, motivating gradient accumulation, which trades off
the number of optimizer steps for a proportional increase in batch size. While it is
common to decrease the learning rate for smaller batch sizes, other hyperparameters
are often held fixed. In this work, we revisit small batch sizes all the way down to
batch size one, and we propose a rule for scaling Adam hyperparameters to small
batch sizes. In particular, rather than holding the decay rate of the second moment
fixed across batch sizes, we propose to hold its half-life fixed in terms of tokens.
We find that small batch sizes (1) train stably, (2) are consistently more robust to
hyperparameter choices, (3) achieve equal or better per-FLOP performance than
larger batch sizes, and (4) notably enable stable language model training with
vanilla SGD, even without momentum, despite storing no optimizer state. Building
on these results, we provide practical recommendations for selecting a batch size
and setting optimizer hyperparameters. We further recommend against gradient
accumulation unless training on multiple devices with multiple model replicas.
Finally, we show that a small batch size combined with an optimizer with a small
state size can provide the performance benefits of full fine-tuning while maintaining
a similar memory footprint to LoRA.
1 4 16 64 256 1024 4096
Batch size
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8Validation loss
SGD
Adafactor
Adam
Muon
(a) Large batches require more
sophisticated optimizers
2 14
2 13
2 12
2 11
2 10
 2 9
 2 8
Learning rate
0.0
0.7
0.9
0.97
0.99
0.9991 (momentum)
Batch size 1
2 11
2 10
 2 9
 2 8
 2 7
 2 6
 2 5
Learning rate
Batch size 512
3.40
3.45
3.50
3.55
3.60
(b) Small batches are more robust
to hyperparameters
Figure 1: Small batch sizes are more robust to optimizer design and hyperparameter values. (a)
Loss achieved by a transformer decoder-only language model with 30M active parameters trained
on 600M tokens of FineWeb-Edu data using SGD, Adafactor, Adam, and Muon. At small batch
sizes, all optimizers achieve similar loss; at large batch sizes, the gap between optimizers grows. (b)
Loss achieved by GPT-2 (124M) trained on 2.5B tokens of FineWeb using AdamW when tuning the
learning rate and β1 hyperparameters for batch sizes 1 and 512. While both batch sizes achieve a
similar lowest loss, the smaller batch size is much more robust to the hyperparameter values, reducing
the need for hyperparameter tuning. For batch size 512, we use the default hyperparameters from
Brown et al. [1] and the nanoGPT public repository [2]. For batch size 1, we turn off weight decay
and rescale β2 to preserve the token half-life, resulting in β2 = 0.9999.
arXiv:2507.07101v2  [cs.LG]  27 Aug 2025

---

<!-- page:2 -->

1 Introduction
Large batch sizes are widely believed to improve the stability of language model training [3, 4, 5, 6].
As a consequence, sophisticated optimizers that perform well in large-batch training are increasingly
standard practice [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In fact, it is common to simulate batch sizes even larger than
the maximum batch size that fits into device memory through gradient accumulation [6, 5, 13, 14].
In small batch size pretraining experiments, one may observe loss spikes and heavy instability
[15, 16, 17, 18]. While it is common to decrease the learning rate for smaller batch sizes, other
hyperparameters, such as the decay rates for the first and second moments in Adam (β1 and β2), are
often held fixed across batch sizes. We show that if instead of holding β2 fixed, we hold the half-life
of β2 fixed (measured in number of tokens), stable training is possible all the way down to batch size
one, as illustrated in Figure 1a.
When scaling hyperparameters in this way, we find that small batch sizes can confer computational
advantages and greater robustness. In the small batch regime, we observe that the speed of conver-
gence is less sensitive to optimizer hyperparameters like the learning rate, and momentum becomes
less necessary, as we find in Figure 1b. In contrast, large batch sizes require large learning rates
to compensate for taking fewer steps at a given compute budget. Large step sizes in turn require
that the optimizer make predictions about the loss surface far away from the current iterate. We
find that predicting such far-away parameter updates requires a sophisticated and carefully tuned
optimizer. For very small batch sizes, we find that even vanilla stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
with no momentum or weight decay, becomes competitive for training language models, in contrast
to findings from recent work [ 19]. The ability to perform stable training without momentum can
confer significant memory advantages, since we do not need to store the corresponding optimizer
state, which can have a significant memory footprint. Based on our observations, we also revisit
Adafactor, a memory-efficient variant of Adam, and show that it can be a compelling alternative to
Adam in the small batch regime, enabling training of larger models in a memory-constrained setting.
These findings could have a significant bearing on practice. Rather than perform gradient accumula-
tion or use the largest batch size that fits into device memory, it could be preferable to use smaller
batch sizes that enable simpler procedures, computational and memory advantages, and require less
tuning. Our findings suggest a best practice of using the smallest batch size that maximizes model
throughput. We find that these prescriptions hold in both LLM pretraining and fine-tuning.
It is common in convex optimization to use higher batch sizes as the loss converges to a minimum
[3, 20]. Intuitively, the higher the gradient to gradient noise magnitude ratio, the smaller the batch size
we should take. For example, if the gradient noise magnitude is close to zero, then we obtain roughly
the same gradient estimate with a small batch size as a large batch size but pay far fewer floating-point
operations (FLOPs), so small batch sizes are efficient. Smaller batch sizes allow us to take more steps
for a fixed FLOP budget. As we converge to a minimum, that same ratio instead often tends to zero
since the gradient norm vanishes while the gradient noise may not, in which case we may want a
larger batch size. We hypothesize that language model training lives in the far-from-convergence
regime where small batch sizes are efficient. Following compute-optimal scaling laws, we would not
train language models into the convergence regime since we could achieve better performance by
instead training a larger model on less data [21, 22].
The paper is structured as follows: in Sections 2 and 3, we cover the background and related work for
language model training. In Section 4, we demonstrate that small batch sizes not only perform on
par with larger batch sizes for several optimizers that we carefully tune, but they also exhibit more
robustness to optimizer and hyperparameter choices. We also show that the gap between vanilla
SGD and more sophisticated optimizers shrinks in the small batch regime. Moreover, we derive
scaling heuristics for Adam’s hyperparameters and demonstrate that they yield improved performance
when transferred to new, larger-scale settings. Finally, we apply these results to memory-efficient
fine-tuning using a small batch size and Adafactor, which achieves the best trade-off between memory
footprint and performance. Motivated by our findings, we provide practical prescriptions for training
language models in Section 5. Namely, we recommend using the smallest batch size that maximizes
model throughput and advise against gradient accumulation for most practitioners.
Our code is available at https://github.com/martin-marek/batch-size .
2

---

<!-- page:3 -->

2 Background: Optimization for Language Models
In this section, we briefly review relevant optimization algorithms for language model training and
the role of their hyperparameters.
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD)[23, 24]. SGD updates model parameters by computing gradients
on mini-batches of data as follows: θt+1 = θt − ηgt, where θt are the model parameters at step t, η
is the learning rate, and gt = ∇θL(θt) is the gradient of the loss function with respect to θt averaged
over B samples. We refer to B as the batch size and consider the extreme case of B = 1in our
experiments.
We show that although SGD is extremely simple, it can perform competitively when correctly
tuned at small batch sizes. Momentum is often added to accumulate a moving average of past
gradients, smoothing updates, and accelerating convergence. However, we focus on vanilla SGD in
our experiments to make the point that, with a small batch size, even momentum is unnecessary.
Adam [25]. Adam is an adaptive optimizer that maintains an exponential moving average (EMA) of
the gradient and squared gradient, referred to as the first and second moments, and denoted as mt
and vt. The timescales of these moving averages are controlled by decay rates β1 and β2:
mt = β1mt−1 + (1− β1)gt
vt = β2vt−1 + (1− β2)g2
t . (1)
The model parameters are then updated as follows: θt+1 = θt − η mt√vt+ϵ, where ϵ is a small constant
to prevent division by zero.
Higher values of β1 and β2 place more weight on past gradients, meaning that the moments are
averaged over longer timescales and evolve slowly. When training language models, values like
β1 = 0.9 and β2 ∈ [0.95, 0.98] are often used in practice [ 1, 26]. While most researchers and
practitioners do not scale β1 and β2 with the batch size, we show in our work that scaling β2 in
particular is crucial for achieving good performance with Adam at a small batch size.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Optimizer step
0
1Decay
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
half-life
1
2
Figure 2: Moment half-life. The first and second
moments in the Adam optimizer are exponential
moving averages of past mini-batch gradients. At
each step, the contribution of past mini-batch gradi-
ents decays by a factor of β. After a given number
of optimizer steps (or equivalently, after a given
number of training tokens), the contribution of any
mini-batch gradient will decay by a factor of 1
2.
We call this number of tokens the decay half-life.
Moment half-life. We found it helpful across
many of our experiments to measure the typical
timescales (measured in number of tokens) that
the first and second moments in Adam are aver-
aged over, instead of directly working with β1
and β2.
At each Adam update step [eq. (1)], the contri-
bution of previous gradients to the first moment
gets reduced by a factor of β1 and the contri-
bution to the second moment gets reduced by a
factor of β2. Hence, by definition, there exists
a certain number of steps n, after which the con-
tribution of any mini-batch gradient is halved:
βn = 1
2. Since every update step corresponds to
observing (B · T ) tokens, where B is the batch
size and T is the sequence length, we can con-
vert the number of optimizer steps into a number
of observed tokens. As such, we can express the
number of tokens it takes to decay a mini-batch
gradient by a factor of 1
2 as the half-life of the
decay rate, denoted by t1/2, where β
t1/2
BT = 1
2.
The half-life provides a measure of the “typical”
timescale that gradients are averaged over. For
example, if we use a half-life of t1/2 = 10M
tokens, this means that the second moment is
averaged over roughly 10M tokens. Throughout this paper, we will refer to the half-life of the first
moment as t1 and the half-life of the second moment as t2, analogously to the more conventional
parameterization β1 and β2.
3

---

<!-- page:4 -->

Adafactor [27]. The second moment estimate vt used in Adam requires storing a number of floating
point values equal to the parameter count of the model itself. Instead, Adafactor only stores the
per-row and per-column sums of the moving average for the neural network weight matrices and
estimates the per-parameter second moment using these sums. Adafactor also does not store a first
moment estimate at all. Therefore, for a weight matrix with shape d1 × d2, the memory requirements
for the moving averages are reduced from 2 × d1 × d2 for Adam to d1 + d2 for Adafactor. We
demonstrate in Section 4.5 that thanks to this sublinear memory cost, Adafactor achieves the best
performance–memory trade-off.
Muon [11]. Another optimizer that was recently demonstrated to be competitive for language model
training is MomentUm Orthogonalized by Newton-Schulz (Muon). Muon is specifically designed
for ≥ 2-dimensional parameter tensors, such as weight matrices in linear layers, where the Newton-
Schulz iterative method is applied to the first moment estimate mt before using it to update the
parameters. Muon is often used in conjunction with other optimizers like Adam. In our experiments
using Muon, we only apply it to hidden layers and use Adam for input embedding and final layers.
Gradient accumulation. When hardware memory constraints prevent us from using large batch
sizes directly, we can simulate a large batch size by summing gradients across multiple successive
micro-batches and only periodically performing an optimizer step. Under gradient accumulation, the
effective batch size is equal to the micro-batch size multiplied by the number of gradient accumulation
steps. While gradient accumulation allows for larger effective batch sizes, it still increases memory
usage compared to using a small batch size, because it requires storing the accumulated gradients.
3 Related Work
Batch size has long been studied in both theory and practice: its impact on the optimization path
[28, 29, 30, 31], its interaction with different optimizers [32, 33, 34, 35], and its effect on the optimal
learning rates and momentum hyperparameters [36, 37, 38, 39, 34, 40, 41, 42, 41, 43, 44]. Prior work
has also explored related themes, such as the flatness argument favoring SGD [45, 46, 47, 48], SGD’s
implicit biases [49, 50, 51, 52], and the comparison between stochastic and full-batch optimization
[53, 54, 55, 56]. However, modern language model training is neither convex nor characterized by
multiple epoch training like vision settings. In fact, we often train for a limited token budget and
stop far before convergence, since otherwise scaling laws suggest that we could train a much better
language model for the same compute budget by training a larger model on fewer tokens [22]. Hence,
prior intuitions, such as the need for a larger batch size in the convergence phase, may not apply. For
this reason, in the rest of this section, we cover works that focus on modern language model training
specifically.
Zhang et al. [41] and Shallue et al. [34] examine the critical batch size, which represents the threshold
beyond which greater data parallelism would lead to diminishing returns, and tune all optimizer
hyperparameters. They argue that any batch size below the critical batch size should perform equally
well when training for the same number of tokens. Differently from these works, we empirically
demonstrate that small batch sizes, including the extreme value of batch size one, perform on par
with or even better than larger batch sizes, and we also show that small batches are more robust to
optimizer and hyperparameter choices and enable SGD to perform competitively. We validate these
findings on language models with modern design choices and up to 1.3 billion parameters.
On the other hand, Vyas et al. [57] argue that gradient noise from small batch sizes does not yield
similar performance advantages in the single epoch setting as it does in multiple-epoch training.
Experimental results from Filatov et al. [58] also suggest that small batches do not work as well as
large batches for language models trained on C4 [59], but notably, the authors do not tune the decay
rates β1 and β2 of the Adam optimizer. In the same vein, Xiao [16] claim that both excessively small
and large batch sizes underperform for language model training with Adam, leading to a U-shaped
curve of the loss as a function of the batch size. We reproduce the exact experiments performed by
Xiao [16] and show that their conclusions are an artifact of incomplete hyperparameter tuning; we
find that simply using a slower decay rate of the second moment estimate β2 makes small batch sizes
competitive.
Zhao et al. [19] train language models on C4 using different diagonal preconditioning optimizers,
namely Adam, Lion, Adafactor with momentum, SGD with momentum, and signed SGD with
momentum. They demonstrate that all these optimizers, aside from SGD which lags behind, achieve
4

---

<!-- page:5 -->

comparable optimal performance and robustness to hyperparameters. We challenge this conclusion
in our work and argue that in the small batch size regime, SGD can perform on par with Adam.
Shallue et al. [34], Kidambi et al. [40] and Zhang et al. [41] find that momentum is not necessary
for SGD when the batch size is small, which aligns with our findings. However, Kidambi et al. [40]
focus on small-scale vision experiments, Shallue et al. [34] and Kidambi et al. [40] do not compare
the performance of SGD vs. Adam, and Zhang et al. [41] claim that SGD performs significantly
worse than Adam. We hypothesize this observation could be a result of Zhang et al. [41] using 64 as
the smallest batch size – we test batch sizes all the way down to 1. Zhang et al. [35] highlight that
the benefits of more sophisticated optimizers diminish as batch size decreases, but their theoretical
results assume a convex quadratic objective and their empirical results only cover a single language
modeling experiment that is limited to a two-layer transformer.
Porian et al. [42] and Zhang et al. [41] find that increasing the value of β2 is important for small-batch
training with Adam. However, their approach is based on discrete hyperparameter sweeps across
β2. In contrast, we introduce and validate a principled scaling rule that holds the second-moment
half-life constant in terms of tokens. Busbridge et al. [60] propose a scaling rule for the decay
coefficient of exponential moving averages similar to ours, but applied in the context of model weight
averaging. Zhang et al. [44] show that there exists a threshold of β∗
2 such that when β2 > β∗
2, Adam
converges (this threshold decreases with batch size, i.e. the threshold is higher for smaller batch
sizes). Chowdhery et al. [43] note that increasing β2 during training leads to better performance for
rare token embeddings. While this is an important insight, we provide a simpler batch-size-aware
heuristic that applies even when using a constant β2 throughout training.
4 Experimental Results
Recent works find that larger batch sizes and relatively sophisticated optimizers are necessary for
stable language model training. For instance, Zhao et al. [19], Kunstner et al. [61], and Zhang et al.
[62] observe that SGD has an extremely slow convergence speed for training language models in
comparison to adaptive optimizers like Adam. Other works find that Adam performs poorly with
small batch sizes [57, 16, 63, 64].
In this section, we revisit and challenge these beliefs by noting that such findings arise due to
poor hyperparameter choices and specific experimental setups, for example, not adjusting the decay
parameters β1 and β2 for Adam at small batch sizes, or using too large a batch size for SGD. We put
these beliefs to the test by running a thorough grid search over optimizer hyperparameters and batch
sizes for SGD, Adam, Adafactor, and Muon. As the cost of a grid search grows exponentially with
the number of hyperparameters, we only perform exhaustive grid searches on a small transformer
decoder-only model with 30 million active parameters following Liu et al.[65] and Xiao [16]. We
use these results to propose heuristics for scaling hyperparameters across batch sizes, and we validate
our findings at a larger scale by pretraining GPT-2 (124M) [66] and GPT-3 (1.3B) [1] and fine-tuning
Gemma 3 (4B) [67]. In our experiments, we study batch sizes spanning more than four orders of
magnitude: {1, 4, 16, 64, 256, 1024, and 4096}.
4.1 Small Batch Sizes Render Sophisticated Optimizers Unnecessary
We train the 30M model on 600 million tokens from the FineWeb-Edu dataset [ 68], following
Chinchilla scaling laws [22]. Our model adopts modern design choice, including rotary embeddings
[69], QK-normalization [70], RMSNorm [71], GELU activations [72], and separate input and output
embeddings. We use a context length of 512 and tokenize the dataset using the GPT-2 tokenizer. We
provide additional experimental details in Appendix A.
To verify the effect of the batch size and optimizer choice on the performance of our model, we run a
dense grid search over all the hyperparameters of SGD, Adam, Adafactor, and Muon. In particular,
we tune the learning rate and the decay factors ( β1, β2) jointly for each batch size to obtain the
hyperparameter configuration that provides the lowest validation loss.
The results in Figure 1a highlight that all optimizers perform best at the smallest batch size, and as
the batch size increases, not only does the performance of each optimizer degrade but also the gap
between different optimizers widens.
5

---

<!-- page:6 -->

Why do large batches require more sophisticated optimizers? Every time our optimizer takes a
step, it makes a prediction about the loss function away from the current parameter vector. When
we train with a higher learning rate and take larger steps, for example in large batch training, our
optimizer must make predictions about the loss function farther away from the current parameter
vector. We hypothesize that taking larger steps leads to a harder prediction problem and that this
harder prediction problem requires a more sophisticated or better-tuned optimizer.
Why is momentum less necessary for small batch sizes? Momentum can be seen as a means of
dampening oscillations that occur on ill-conditioned loss functions [73]. When we take large steps,
we may overshoot the minimum across short (i.e. high curvature) axes, leading to oscillations. By
averaging gradients across iterations, these oscillations cancel out in the momentum term. However,
when the optimizer takes small steps, as is the case in small batch training paired with a small learning
rate, parameter updates do not overshoot the minimum across short axes, so there are no oscillations
to damp. We illustrate this effect in Appendix B through a toy example.
Summary: The difference in performance between optimizers shrinks under small batch
sizes. In fact, vanilla SGD without momentum performs competitively for small batch sizes.
4.2 Large Batch Training is Sensitive to Hyperparameters
To evaluate robustness to hyperparameters at each batch size, we perform an ablation around the
optimal hyperparameters achieving the lowest validation loss for the Adam optimizer. We use the
same 30M parameter model trained on the FineWeb-Edu dataset as in Section 4.1.
We report in Figure 3 the change in the loss with respect to the lowest value of the loss achieved
at every batch size, ranging from 1 to 4096. On the x-axis, we report the scaled value of the
hyperparameters relative to the value of the hyperparameter that achieved the best loss. We perform
this rescaling to make the plots for different batch sizes easier to compare, since the scale of their
optimal hyperparameters varies.
2 3
 2 2
 2 1
 20 21 22 23
Scaled learning rate
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Change in loss
2 3
 2 2
 2 1
 20 21 22 23
Scaled t1
2 3
 2 2
 2 1
 20 21 22 23
Scaled t2
1
4
16
64
256
1024
4096
Batch size
Figure 3: Small batch sizes are robust to hyperparameter misspecification. Loss sensitivity to
learning rate, β1, and β2 using Adam at batch sizes from 1 to 4096. Each curve sweeps a single
hyperparameter while holding the others fixed at their optimal values. We observe that smaller batch
sizes exhibit broader low-loss regions across all hyperparameters, indicating greater robustness to
misspecification. The x-axis shows a scaling of each hyperparameter relative to its optimum value.
We parameterize β1 and β2 in terms of their decay half-lives, as described in Section 2. Results are
shown for the 30M parameter model trained on 600M tokens of FineWeb-Edu.
We observe a striking result: small batch sizes are significantly more robust to all of Adam’s
hyperparameters than large batch sizes. More importantly, batch size one achieves a nearly optimal
loss for the entire range of learning rates, β1, and β2 hyperparameters that we consider in our search,
whereas the loss for larger batches increases sharply as we vary the hyperparameter values.
To highlight the compounding value of this robustness displayed by small batch sizes as the number
of hyperparameters increases, we perform a joint 2-dimensional ablation with respect to both the
learning rate and decay rate β1 on a GPT-2 model in Figure 1b. Consistent with the previous result,
batch size one yields much broader low-loss regions across both hyperparameters compared to batch
size 512. Therefore, if practitioners were to consider not only the budget to run a single training run
but also the computational budget for tuning the corresponding optimizer hyperparameters, a smaller
batch size might be preferable.
6

---

<!-- page:7 -->

Why are smaller batch sizes more robust to hyperparameter choices? Similar to the previous
subsection, we hypothesize that large batch sizes require careful hyperparameter tuning since they
require large step sizes and therefore have to make predictions about the loss surface further away
from the current parameter vector.
Summary: Small batch sizes are more robust to hyperparameter misspecification and might
be preferable after accounting for the hyperparameter tuning budget.
4.3 Adam Hyperparameters: How to Scale Them with Batch Size and Why That Is Necessary
We use our grid search results on the 30M model to test existing scaling laws for Adam hyperparame-
ters and also devise new scaling heuristics for these hyperparameters. Figure 4 shows the validation
loss on FineWeb-Edu for different Adam hyperparameters, namely the learning rate, and decay
parameters β1 and β2. We similarly plot the loss for different values of the second moment half-life
t2, which refers to the number of tokens it takes for a gradient’s contribution to the momentum to be
reduced to half of its initial value. We provide a more detailed description of t2 in Section 2.
For the learning rate, we observe that the square root scaling recommended by several works and
commonly used in practice does not hold [74, 9, 37, 75, 76]. In fact, Figure 4 (left) shows that the
learning rate scales more slowly than a square root factor with the batch size. For instance, as we scale
the batch size from 1 to 1024, the square root rule would indicate that the corresponding learning rate
should be scaled by a factor of 32, whereas we find that a factor of only about 3 empirically works
better.
1 4 16 64 25610244096
batch size
0.0002
0.0005
0.001
0.002
0.006
0.01
0.03
learning rate
1 4 16 64 25610244096
batch size
0
0.7
0.9
0.97
0.99
0.997
0.9991
1 4 16 64 25610244096
batch size
0
0.7
0.9
0.97
0.99
0.997
0.9992
1 4 16 64 25610244096
batch size
0.1M
1M
10M
100Mt2
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Figure 4: Fixing the half-life of the second moment estimate in terms of tokens t2 scales better
than fixing β2. We plot the validation loss on FineWeb-Edu for the 30M parameter model when
varying the Adam learning rate, β1, β2, and the second moment half-life t2, across different batch
sizes. The learning rate does not follow the commonly recommended square root scaling with batch
size. We also observe that the default β1 = 0.9 performs consistently well across all batch sizes. In
contrast, keeping β2 fixed leads to suboptimal performance at small batch sizes. Instead, fixing the
second moment half-life t2 across batch sizes provides a simple and effective scaling rule.
We also validate that the default value of the first moment decay β1 = 0.9 used by practitioners
for language model training does indeed achieve good performance across batch sizes. In contrast,
keeping β2 fixed to its default value, typically in the range [0.95, 0.98] for language models, does not
scale effectively to smaller batches, which require a significantly larger value of β2. On the other
hand, measuring the decay of the second moment in tokens through the half-life t2 offers a strong
scaling heuristic: keeping t2 fixed to its optimal value as we scale up or down the batch size provides
good performance without re-tuning this hyperparameter at new batch sizes. This finding translates
to the following scaling heuristic: if we were to scale the batch size from B to B∗, the new β∗
2 would
depend on the old β associated with B as follows:
β∗
2 = β(B∗/B)
2 (2)
Next, we test our scaling heuristics in a different setting proposed in Xiao [16]. The authors train
a decoder-only transformer with 19M non-embedding parameters using Adam on the C4 dataset
[59], and only tune the learning rate with β1 and β2 fixed to their default values of 0.9 and 0.95,
7

---

<!-- page:8 -->

respectively. We reproduce their Figure 10(a) results in Figure 5 (left), where small batch sizes of 16
and 32 perform worse than larger batch sizes of 128 and 256.
10 4
 10 3
 10 2
 10 1
Learning rate
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9Validation loss
2=0.95
10 4
 10 3
 10 2
 10 1
Learning rate
 
t2=10M
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
Batch size
Figure 5: Scaling β2 according to our heuristics significantly improves the performance of small
batch sizes. Left: Results from Xiao [16], showing suboptimal performance for small batch sizes
due to fixed Adam hyperparameters. Right: Our results after scaling β2 such that the decay half-life
t2 is constant across batch sizes. The smallest batch sizes now perform on par with larger batch sizes.
While our scaling heuristics imply that β1 = 0.9 could work well across batch sizes, we recommend
scaling β2 such that t2 is fixed. By following this simple one-shot scaling recommendation and
without any additional hyperparameter tuning, we achieve significantly different results in Figure 5
(right). Strikingly, small batch sizes 16 and 32 achieve on par performance with larger batch sizes 128
and 256, therefore implying that: (i) the previous results from Xiao [16] are largely a consequence of
incomplete hyperparameter tuning, (ii) our simple one-shot heuristic generalizes to other settings.
Summary: While keeping β1 fixed to the default value of 0.9 scales well with the batch size,
β2 should be scaled such that the token half-life is fixed. With this prescription, small batch
sizes can perform on par with or better than larger batch sizes.
4.4 SGD Performs Competitively with Adaptive Optimizers at the Billion+ Parameter Scale
Through our experiments with 30M parameter models, we conclude that: (1) small batch sizes can
perform on par with or better than larger batch sizes, (2) small batch sizes require less sophisticated
optimizers and are more robust to hyperparameter misspecification, (3) in particular, vanilla SGD can
be competitive with adaptive optimizers in the small batch regime, and (4) we propose a new scaling
heuristic for β2 such that the half-life t2 is fixed, and validate that it leads to improved performance.
In Figure 6, we test these findings at a larger scale by training GPT-2 (124M) [66] and GPT-3 (1.3B)
[1] on the FineWeb dataset [68].
For the larger 1.3B model, hyperparameter tuning of the learning rate for each optimizer was
computationally prohibitive; therefore, we used AdamW with the default hyperparameter settings
from Brown et al. [1] (batch size 512, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.95, w= 0.1) as our baseline. When using
batch size 1 with Adam, we do not perform any hyperparameter tuning – we turn off weight decay
and scale the learning rate following our empirical results from Section 4.3. We compare two scaling
heuristics for β2: keeping β2 fixed and keeping the half-life t2 fixed. We do, however, sweep over
four learning rates for Adafactor and SGD, since we have no reference values for these optimizers.
Interestingly, we find that SGD performs on par with the AdamW baseline, and Adam and Adafactor
with batch size 1 both outperform the AdamW baseline.
For the smaller (124M) model, we follow the same procedure, except we tune the learning rate of
each optimizer, which improves the performance of the AdamW baseline.
8

---

<!-- page:9 -->

0 1B 2B 3B 4B 5B 6B 7B 8B 9B 10B
Training tokens
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0Validation loss
GPT-3 (1.3B)
0 0.5B 1B 1.5B 2B 2.5B
Training tokens
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
GPT-2 (124M)
  Adam
 BS=1
2 = 0.95
SGD
BS=1
 AdamW
 BS=512
2 = 0.95
  Adafactor
     BS=1
2 = 0.9999
    Adam
     BS=1
2 = 0.9999
Figure 6: Vanilla SGD performs competitively at larger model scales with minimal tuning. We
train GPT-3 (1.3B) and GPT-2 (124M) on FineWeb and compare validation loss across optimizers.
Left: For GPT-3 (1.3B), vanilla SGD with batch size 1 and no momentum performs on par with the
AdamW configuration from Brown et al. [1], despite having no optimizer state. Our proposed β2
scaling rule improves Adam’s performance at small batch sizes and outperforms the baseline. Right:
After tuning the learning rate of each optimizer on GPT-2 (124M), Adam and Adafactor at batch size
1 match the performance of AdamW at batch size 512, while SGD performs slightly worse.
4.5 Full Fine-tuning on a Budget
Adam
(acc.)
Adam Muon Adafactor SGD
0
20
40
60
80
100Memory (GB)
Other
Accum. grads.
2nd moment
1st moment
Activations
Model
Figure 7: Minimum memory requirements to
train GPT-3 (13B), assuming all parameters and
activations are stored in 16-bit precision, gradi-
ent checkpointing is used after every transformer
block layer, and the backward pass is fused with
the optimizer update step (so that the full model
gradient never needs to be materialized in mem-
ory). The dashed line shows the available memory
on an NVIDIA A100 40GB GPU, which is not
large enough to store expensive optimizer states
or accumulated gradients. We measured the true
memory usage of each optimizer by performing
fused backward passes in PyTorch on an NVIDIA
B200 GPU.
In Sections 4.1 to 4.4, we studied pretraining
across different model scales and discovered that
with small batch sizes, optimizers with small
or even no state (like Adafactor and SGD) can
perform competitively with Adam. We now ex-
ploit this observation for memory-efficient fine-
tuning.
While pretraining is typically bottlenecked by
compute, fine-tuning is instead often bottle-
necked by memory. Indeed, fine-tuning a large
model on a small dataset does not require many
FLOPs, but it does require storing the (large)
model and optimizer state in memory. In Fig-
ure 7, we show an example where the GPU
has enough memory to store the model, but not
enough memory to also store an expensive op-
timizer like Adam.
A common approach to reduce memory usage
during fine-tuning is to freeze the model weights
and only train Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
[77] modules on top of the frozen model, which
substantially reduces the number of trainable
parameters and also proportionately reduces the
size of the optimizer state. However, LoRA
often underperforms full parameter fine-tuning
[78, 79].
We propose to use a small batch size combined
with a small optimizer like Adafactor to get the
performance benefits of full fine-tuning while
having similar memory requirements to LoRA.
9

---

<!-- page:10 -->

LoRA
BS=1
Adafactor
BS=1
Adam
BS=1
Adam
BS=16
17%
18%
19%MATH score
Figure 8: Adafactor enables memory-efficient
fine-tuning. We fine-tune and evaluate a non-
instruction-tuned Gemma 3 (4B) model [ 67] on
the MATH dataset [80]. We compare the use of
LoRA ( r = 16) against full model fine-tuning,
and a small vs. large batch size. For each training
method, the width of the plotted bar is proportional
to the memory footprint. LoRA uses bfloat16
model weights and float32 adaptors, and Adafactor
similarly uses bfloat16 weights but float32 opti-
mizer state. We fix the second moment half-life
to be consistent across batch sizes (β2 = 0.95 for
batch size 16 and β2 = 0.997 for batch size 1). We
run each optimizer for 5 epochs and sweep over 8
learning rates. We train LoRA using Adam.
We provide an example in Figure 8 by fine-
tuning a non-instruction-tuned Gemma 3 (4B)
on the MATH dataset for 5 epochs. As a base-
line, we fine-tune the model with Adam and
batch size 16 (requiring gradient accumulation),
storing all parameters in float32 precision, which
requires storing a total of 16 bytes in memory
per model parameter. Another baseline is pro-
vided by LoRA, which requires only around 2
bytes per model parameter since the pretrained
model checkpoint is stored in bfloat16 preci-
sion, and the number of trainable parameters for
LoRA is negligible compared to the model size.
We make two observations based on our results.
First, when using Adam, we can reduce the
batch size all the way down to one while follow-
ing the β2 scaling heuristic from Equation (2),
eliminating the need to store accumulated gra-
dients in memory. Second, when a small batch
size is used, we can replace Adam with Adafac-
tor, which has a much smaller state size. To
further reduce the memory use of Adafactor, we
store its (tiny) optimizer state in float32, but we
store model weights in bfloat16, using stochas-
tic rounding to update the weights after every
optimizer step (we discuss the importance of
stochastic rounding in Appendix A.3).
Summary: We recommend that practitioners training large models in memory-constrained
settings exploit the benefits of small batch sizes (e.g. using optimizers with a small state size)
rather than trying to emulate the large batch size setting typically used in industry.
5 Practical Recommendations and Discussion
We show that small batch sizes, even as low as 1, consistently match or outperform large batches
across model scales when tuned properly, in both pretraining and fine-tuning. In particular, SGD
with batch size 1 performs on par with the AdamW baseline for GPT-3 (1.3B) with minimal tuning.
We also propose a simple scaling rule for β2 based on a fixed second-moment half-life in tokens,
which generalizes across model scales. Our results contradict common assumptions about large batch
training and gradient accumulation.
Our general recommendation for setting the batch size is to use the smallest batch size that
maximizes model throughput (measured in tokens / second) or equivalently the model FLOPs
utilization (MFU) [43]. To achieve this objective, the accelerator must spend more time performing
computation than moving data between HBM and register memory, which in practice means using
a batch size of at least several hundred tokens per device [ 81]. When training frontier models on
large clusters, this can correspond to a batch size of many millions of tokens. But when training on a
single device, the smallest batch size required to achieve high arithmetic intensity could be as low as
a few thousand tokens. We therefore recommend avoiding gradient accumulation unless training
on multiple devices with multiple model replicas, where the bandwidth between model replicas is a
bottleneck. Lastly, when working in a memory-constrained setting, we recommend exploiting the
benefits of simple optimizers combined with a small batch size.
Several open questions remain. How do these findings interact with batch size schedules? Can we
further reduce weight precision in fine-tuning from 16 to 8 or even 4 bits? Can we design more
effective optimizers with a small state, tuned to the small batch size regime? And can we theoretically
understand why fixing the second-moment half-life in tokens generalizes across scales?
10

---

<!-- page:11 -->

Acknowledgements
We thank Shikai Qiu and Alexandra Souly for helpful discussions. This work was supported by NSF
CAREER IIS-2145492, NSF CDS&E-MSS 2134216, NSF HDR-2118310, BigHat Biosciences, and
Google’s TPU Research Cloud (TRC) program: https://sites.research.google/trc/.
References
[1] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[2] Andrej Karpathy. nanoGPT: The simplest, fastest repository for training/finetuning medium-
sized gpts., 2023. URL https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT.
[3] Nidham Gazagnadou, Robert Gower, and Joseph Salmon. Optimal mini-batch and step sizes
for saga. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2142–2150. PMLR, 2019.
[4] Atsushi Nitanda, Tomoya Murata, and Taiji Suzuki. Sharp characterization of optimal minibatch
size for stochastic finite sum convex optimization. Knowledge and Information Systems, 63(9):
2513–2539, 2021.
[5] Sungkyung Kim, Adam Lee, Junyoung Park, Sounho Chung, Jusang Oh, and Jay-Yoon
Lee. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning of instructblip for visual reasoning tasks. In Effi-
cient Natural Language and Speech Processing Workshop at NeurIPS 2023 , 2023. URL
https://neurips2023-enlsp.github.io/papers/paper_88.pdf.
[6] Deepanway Ghosal, Yew Ken Chia, Navonil Majumder, and Soujanya Poria. Flacuna: Unleash-
ing the problem solving power of vicuna using flan fine-tuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02053,
2023.
[7] Yang You, Igor Gitman, and Boris Ginsburg. Large batch training of convolutional networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03888, 2017.
[8] Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor
optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1842–1850. PMLR,
2018.
[9] Yang You, Jing Li, Sashank Reddi, Jonathan Hseu, Sanjiv Kumar, Srinadh Bhojanapalli,
Xiaodan Song, James Demmel, Kurt Keutzer, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Large batch optimization for
deep learning: Training bert in 76 minutes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00962, 2019.
[10] Hong Liu, Zhiyuan Li, David Hall, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Sophia: A scalable stochastic
second-order optimizer for language model pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14342,
2023.
[11] Keller Jordan, Yuchen Jin, Vlado Boza, Jiacheng Yo, Franz Cesista, Laker Newhouse, and
Jeremy Bernstein. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks, 2024. URL
https://kellerjordan.github.io/posts/muon/.
[12] Nikhil Vyas, Depen Morwani, Rosie Zhao, Mujin Kwun, Itai Shapira, David Brandfonbrener,
Lucas Janson, and Sham Kakade. Soap: Improving and stabilizing shampoo using adam. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.11321, 2024.
[13] Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang,
Yifan Xu, Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[14] Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ili ´c, Daniel Hesslow,
Roman Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, François Yvon, Matthias Gallé, et al. Bloom: A
176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100,
2022.
11

---

<!-- page:12 -->

[15] Peng Xu, Dhruv Kumar, Wei Yang, Wenjie Zi, Keyi Tang, Chenyang Huang, Jackie Chi Kit
Cheung, Simon J.D. Prince, and Yanshuai Cao. Optimizing deeper transformers on small
datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15355, 2020.
[16] Lechao Xiao. Rethinking conventional wisdom in machine learning: From generalization to
scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15156, 2024.
[17] Maxime Labonne. Fine-tune llama 3.1 ultra-efficiently with unsloth. https://huggingface.
co/blog/mlabonne/sft-llama3, 2024. Accessed: 2025-05-15.
[18] Weights & Biases. Comprehensive guide to llm pre-training steps. https://wandb.ai/site/
articles/training-llms/pre-training-steps/ , 2025. Accessed: 2025-05-15.
[19] Rosie Zhao, Depen Morwani, David Brandfonbrener, Nikhil Vyas, and Sham M Kakade.
Deconstructing what makes a good optimizer for autoregressive language models. In The
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[20] Scott Sievert and Shrey Shah. Improving the convergence of sgd through adaptive batch sizes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08222, 2019.
[21] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
[22] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 2022.
[23] Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The annals of
mathematical statistics, pages 400–407, 1951.
[24] Léon Bottou. Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent. In Proceedings
of COMPSTAT’2010: 19th International Conference on Computational StatisticsParis France,
August 22-27, 2010 Keynote, Invited and Contributed Papers, pages 177–186. Springer, 2010.
[25] Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[26] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-
thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[27] Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory
cost. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4596–4604. PMLR, 2018.
[28] Stanisław Jastrz˛ ebski, Zachary Kenton, Nicolas Ballas, Asja Fischer, Yoshua Bengio, and Amos
Storkey. On the relation between the sharpest directions of dnn loss and the sgd step length.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05031, 2018.
[29] Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Maciej Szymczak, Stanislav Fort, Devansh Arpit, Jacek Tabor,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Krzysztof Geras. The break-even point on optimization trajectories
of deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09572, 2020.
[30] Kiwon Lee, Andrew Cheng, Elliot Paquette, and Courtney Paquette. Trajectory of mini-batch
momentum: Batch size saturation and convergence in high dimensions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:36944–36957, 2022.
[31] Alexander Atanasov, Alexandru Meterez, James B Simon, and Cengiz Pehlevan. The optimiza-
tion landscape of sgd across the feature learning strength. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04642,
2024.
[32] D Randall Wilson and Tony R Martinez. The general inefficiency of batch training for gradient
descent learning. Neural networks, 16(10):1429–1451, 2003.
12

---

<!-- page:13 -->

[33] Jianmin Chen, Xinghao Pan, Rajat Monga, Samy Bengio, and Rafal Jozefowicz. Revisiting
distributed synchronous sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00981, 2016.
[34] Christopher J Shallue, Jaehoon Lee, Joseph Antognini, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Roy Frostig, and
George E Dahl. Measuring the effects of data parallelism on neural network training. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 20(112):1–49, 2019.
[35] Guodong Zhang, Lala Li, Zachary Nado, James Martens, Sushant Sachdeva, George Dahl, Chris
Shallue, and Roger B Grosse. Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch sizes? insights
from a noisy quadratic model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[36] Samuel L Smith and Quoc V Le. A bayesian perspective on generalization and stochastic
gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06451, 2017.
[37] Diego Granziol, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts. Learning rates as a function of batch size:
A random matrix theory approach to neural network training. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 23(173):1–65, 2022.
[38] Runzhe Wang, Sadhika Malladi, Tianhao Wang, Kaifeng Lyu, and Zhiyuan Li. The marginal
value of momentum for small learning rate sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15196, 2023.
[39] Jingwen Fu, Bohan Wang, Huishuai Zhang, Zhizheng Zhang, Wei Chen, and Nanning
Zheng. When and why momentum accelerates sgd: An empirical study. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.09000, 2023.
[40] Rahul Kidambi, Praneeth Netrapalli, Prateek Jain, and Sham Kakade. On the insufficiency
of existing momentum schemes for stochastic optimization. In 2018 Information Theory and
Applications Workshop (ITA), pages 1–9, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ITA.2018.8503173.
[41] Hanlin Zhang, Depen Morwani, Nikhil Vyas, Jingfeng Wu, Difan Zou, Udaya Ghai, Dean
Foster, and Sham Kakade. How does critical batch size scale in pre-training? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.21676, 2024.
[42] Tomer Porian, Mitchell Wortsman, Jenia Jitsev, Ludwig Schmidt, and Yair Carmon. Resolving
discrepancies in compute-optimal scaling of language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=4fSSqpk1sM.
[43] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(240):
1–113, 2023.
[44] Yushun Zhang, Congliang Chen, Naichen Shi, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Adam
can converge without any modification on update rules. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 28386–28399. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2022. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/
b6260ae5566442da053e5ab5d691067a-Paper-Conference.pdf .
[45] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Genevieve B Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Efficient backprop. In
Neural networks: Tricks of the trade, pages 9–50. Springer, 2002.
[46] Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping
Tak Peter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04836, 2016.
[47] Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola,
Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training
imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
[48] Dominic Masters and Carlo Luschi. Revisiting small batch training for deep neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07612, 2018.
13

---

<!-- page:14 -->

[49] Sanjeev Arora, Nadav Cohen, Wei Hu, and Yuping Luo. Implicit regularization in deep matrix
factorization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[50] David GT Barrett and Benoit Dherin. Implicit gradient regularization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.11162, 2020.
[51] Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Jason Lee, and Tengyu Ma. Shape matters: Understanding the
implicit bias of the noise covariance. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2315–2357.
PMLR, 2021.
[52] Samuel L Smith, Benoit Dherin, David GT Barrett, and Soham De. On the origin of implicit
regularization in stochastic gradient descent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12176, 2021.
[53] Rong Ge, Furong Huang, Chi Jin, and Yang Yuan. Escaping from saddle points—online
stochastic gradient for tensor decomposition. In Conference on learning theory, pages 797–842.
PMLR, 2015.
[54] Simon S Du, Chi Jin, Jason D Lee, Michael I Jordan, Aarti Singh, and Barnabas Poczos. Gradient
descent can take exponential time to escape saddle points. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[55] Aitor Lewkowycz, Yasaman Bahri, Ethan Dyer, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Guy Gur-Ari.
The large learning rate phase of deep learning: the catapult mechanism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.02218, 2020.
[56] Jonas Geiping, Micah Goldblum, Phillip E Pope, Michael Moeller, and Tom Goldstein. Stochas-
tic training is not necessary for generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14119, 2021.
[57] Nikhil Vyas, Depen Morwani, Rosie Zhao, Gal Kaplun, Sham Kakade, and Boaz Barak.
Beyond implicit bias: The insignificance of sgd noise in online learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.08590, 2023.
[58] Oleg Filatov, Jan Ebert, Jiangtao Wang, and Stefan Kesselheim. Time transfer: On optimal
learning rate and batch size in the infinite data limit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.05838, 2024.
[59] Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasovi´c, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld,
Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the
colossal clean crawled corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758, 2021.
[60] Dan Busbridge, Jason Ramapuram, Pierre Ablin, Tatiana Likhomanenko, Eeshan Gunesh
Dhekane, Xavier Suau, and Russell Webb. How to scale your EMA. In Thirty-seventh
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=DkeeXVdQyu.
[61] Frederik Kunstner, Alan Milligan, Robin Yadav, Mark Schmidt, and Alberto Bietti. Heavy-
tailed class imbalance and why adam outperforms gradient descent on language models. In
A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors,
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 30106–30148. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2024/file/350e718ff74062b4bac2c6ffd9e1ac66-Paper-Conference.pdf .
[62] Yushun Zhang, Congliang Chen, Tian Ding, Ziniu Li, Ruoyu Sun, and Zhi-Quan Luo. Why
transformers need adam: A hessian perspective. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
X6rqEpbnj3.
[63] Qi Liu and Wanjing Ma. The epochal sawtooth effect: Unveiling training loss oscillations in
adam and other optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10056, 2024.
[64] Shuaipeng Li, Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Xingwu Sun, Hao Wu, Dian Jiao, Weiyan Wang,
Chengjun Liu, Zheng Fang, Jinbao Xue, Yangyu Tao, Bin Cui, and Di Wang. Surge phenomenon
in optimal learning rate and batch size scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14578, 2024.
14

---

<!-- page:15 -->

[65] Peter J. Liu, Roman Novak, Jaehoon Lee, Mitchell Wortsman, Lechao Xiao, Katie Everett,
Alexander A. Alemi, Mark Kurzeja, Pierre Marcenac, Izzeddin Gur, Simon Kornblith, Kelvin Xu,
Gamaleldin Elsayed, Ian Fischer, Jeffrey Pennington, Ben Adlam, and Jascha-Sohl Dickstein.
Nanodo: A minimal transformer decoder-only language model implementation in JAX., 2024.
URL http://github.com/google-deepmind/nanodo.
[66] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
[67] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona
Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, et al. Gemma
3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786, 2025.
[68] Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlí ˇcek, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin A Raffel,
Leandro V on Werra, Thomas Wolf, et al. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest
text data at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:30811–30849, 2024.
[69] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer:
Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing, 568:127063, 2024.
[70] Mostafa Dehghani, Josip Djolonga, Basil Mustafa, Piotr Padlewski, Jonathan Heek, Justin
Gilmer, Andreas Peter Steiner, Mathilde Caron, Robert Geirhos, Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, et al.
Scaling vision transformers to 22 billion parameters. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 7480–7512. PMLR, 2023.
[71] Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[72] Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Gaussian error linear units (gelus). arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
[73] Gabriel Goh. Why momentum really works. Distill, 2017. doi: 10.23915/distill.00006. URL
http://distill.pub/2017/momentum.
[74] Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, and OpenAI Dota Team. An empirical model
of large-batch training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06162, 2018.
[75] Sadhika Malladi, Kaifeng Lyu, Abhishek Panigrahi, and Sanjeev Arora. On the sdes and scaling
rules for adaptive gradient algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
7697–7711, 2022.
[76] Xi Wang and Laurence Aitchison. Batch size invariant adam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18824,
2024.
[77] Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=nZeVKeeFYf9.
[78] Dan Biderman, Jacob Portes, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Mansheej Paul, Philip Greengard,
Connor Jennings, Daniel King, Sam Havens, Vitaliy Chiley, Jonathan Frankle, et al. Lora learns
less and forgets less. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09673, 2024.
[79] Shibo Wang and Pankaj Kanwar. Artur niederfahrenhorst and kourosh
hakhamaneshi and rehaan ahmad, 2023. URL https://www.anyscale.com/blog/
fine-tuning-llms-lora-or-full-parameter-an-in-depth-analysis-with-llama-2 .
[80] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang,
Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the
math dataset. In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung, editors, Proceedings of the Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , volume 1, 2021. URL
https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2021/file/be83ab3ecd0db773eb2dc1b0a17836a1-Paper-round2.pdf .
15

---

<!-- page:16 -->

[81] Jacob Austin, Sholto Douglas, Roy Frostig, Anselm Levskaya, Charlie Chen, Sharad Vikram,
Federico Lebron, Peter Choy, Vinay Ramasesh, Albert Webson, and Reiner Pope. How to scale
your model. 2025. Retrieved from https://jax-ml.github.io/scaling-book/.
[82] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
[83] Norm Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai, Nishant Patil,
Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, et al. Tpu v4: An optically reconfigurable
supercomputer for machine learning with hardware support for embeddings. In Proceedings of
the 50th annual international symposium on computer architecture, pages 1–14, 2023.
16

---

<!-- page:17 -->

A Experimental Details
A.1 Model architecture
Across all of our pretraining experiments, we used four decoder-only transformer models [82] that
share the same architecture and only differ in layer dimensions and tokenizer. We specify the exact
layer dimensions and tokenizers used in Table 1.
We used a model architecture based on GPT-2 [ 66] with several small changes based on modern
practices to improve model FLOPs utilization (MFU) [43], simplify implementation, and marginally
improve model performance:
• Head dimension 128
– We increased the head dimension on the smaller models from 64 to 128 to achieve
a higher MFU. We trained each model on TPU v4, which has 128 x 128 multiply-
accumulators. Using a head dimension any lower than 128 would prevent us from
filling the multiply-accumulators, thereby lowering MFU. This decision follows the
Gemma family of models optimized for TPU training [67].
• RMSNorm [71]
– We wanted to include the Muon optimizer in our benchmarks, but Muon does not
support training 1D layers. To get around this limitation, we simply omitted the use of
any 1D layers by using RMSNorm with no bias.
• Untied embeddings
– We do not tie the weights of the first and last layer. This increases the number of
trainable parameters but does not increase the number of active parameters or the cost
of training.
• Rotary positional embeddings (RoPE) [69]
• QK-norm [70]
• GELU [72]
We pretrained most models to follow Chinchilla scaling laws, i.e. using 20 tokens per active parameter.
The only exception to this rule is the GPT-3 (1.3B) model, which we only trained for 10B tokens,
similar to the original GPT-2 (1.5B) model.
Model 30M 19M[16] GPT-2 (124M) GPT-3 (1.3B)
Dataset Fineweb-Edu C4 Fineweb Fineweb
Tokenizer GPT-2 T5 GPT-2 GPT-2
V ocabulary size 50257 32101 50257 50257
Model / embedding dimension 384 512 768 2048
Hidden dimension 1536 2048 3072 8192
Head dimension 128 128 128 128
Number of layers 6 6 12 24
Sequence length 512 512 1024 2048
Non-embedding parameters 11M 19M 85M 1.2B
Embedding parameters 2 x 19M 2 x 16M 2 x 39M 2 x 103M
Active parameters 30M 35M 124M 1.3B
Total trainable parameters 49M 52M 162M 1.4B
Training tokens 600M 705M 2.5B 10B
Table 1: Model dimensions and configurations across different architectures.
A.2 Learning rate schedule
For pretraining, we used a linear warmup for the first 5% of the training steps (from zero to peak
learning rate), followed by cosine decay (from peak learning rate to zero). We use the same schedule
for all batch sizes. For fine-tuning, we used a constant learning rate.
17

---

<!-- page:18 -->

A.3 Stochastic rounding
1 4 16 64 256 1024
Batch size
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0FineWeb Edu loss
BF16 (closest)
BF16 (stochastic)
FP32
Figure 9: Stochastic rounding enables bfloat16
training. We repeat the training runs from Fig-
ure 1a using the optimum hyperparameters found
for Adafactor. We ablate the precision of the model
weights, using: (1) float32 – same as in Figure 1a,
(2) bfloat16 with closest rounding, (3) bfloat16
with stochastic rounding. The optimizer state is
always stored in float32 precision since it has a
negligible size.
Across all experiments, we compute activations
and store the optimizer state in float32 precision.
We also store all trainable model parameters in
float32 precision except for Adafactor in Fig-
ure 8, which uses bfloat16 weights in order to
match the memory footprint of LoRA. While it
is a common practice to use bfloat16 weights for
computation, the master copy of model weights
is typically still stored in float32 to enable ac-
cumulating small updates to the weights. When
the master weights are stored in bfloat16 (which
only has ∼2.4 decimal points of precision), stan-
dard deterministic rounding can bias the weight
updates, meaning that accumulating gradients
across many small batches no longer approxi-
mates computing gradients from a single larger
batch. Because of this bias, reducing the batch
size might actually be detrimental with stan-
dard deterministic rounding. One approach to
remove this bias is to compute updated weights
in float32, then stochastically round them to
bfloat16 for storage. In a pretraining experiment
in Figure 9, we show that stochastic rounding
can bring the performance of bfloat16 weights close to the performance of float32 weights, even for
the smallest batch sizes. In the fine-tuning experiment in Figure 8, we did not observe a statistically
significant difference between float32 weights and bfloat16 weights with stochastic rounding for
Adafactor.
A.4 Computational cost
We used a pod of 32 TPU v4 chips to train all models [ 83]. Table 2 shows the time for a single
training run of each model as well as the total computational cost for each model. Using batch sizes 1
and 2 resulted in roughly a 30-70% drop in MFU compared to using a larger batch size, depending
on the model size and sequence length. In practice, we do not recommend using a batch size so small
that it severely degrades MFU. We only used the smallest batch sizes to scientifically study the effect
of batch size.
Model 30M 19M[16] GPT-2 (124M)GPT-3 (1.3B) Gemma3 (4B)
Accelerator 1 TPU v4 chip1 TPU v4 chip1 TPU v4 chip4 TPU v4 chips4 TPU v4 chips
Average run time 24 min 25 min 7.5 hours 100 hours 44 min
Num. runs: Figure 1 3110 / 312 11 /
Num. runs: Figure 3 1911 / / / /
Num. runs: Figure 4 1820 / / / /
Num. runs: Figure 5 / 1260 / / /
Num. runs: Figure 6 / / 40 / /
Num. runs: Figure 8 / / / / 256
Total num. of runs 6841 1260 352 11 256
Total TPU v4 chip hours 2736 525 2640 4400 750
Table 2: Computational cost of each experiment.
B Additional Results
In Figure 10 we illustrate on a toy problem why momentum is required when the batch size is large
but not required when the batch size is small. We run SGD on two variables (x, y) to minimize the
value of a loss function defined as x + 10y2. Notice that this loss function is much steeper in the
vertical direction compared to the horizontal direction.
18

---

<!-- page:19 -->

We simulate the use of a small and a large batch size by adding noise to the gradient estimate at every
step. In particular, we define the minibatch gradient estimate at each step to be the true gradient
multiplied by a random variable sampled from a normal distribution N (1, σ2), where the noise scale
σ controls the signal-to-noise ratio of the minibatch gradient estimate. We simulate a large batch size
by using a high signal-to-ratio of 5, and a small batch size by using a small signal-to-noise ratio of
only 0.3.
In our experiments training language models, we fixed the computational budget across all batch sizes
by only training for a single epoch. Analogously in this toy example, we only run 10 optimization
steps using the simulated large batch size, but we run 100 optimization steps using the small batch
size. The idea is that if we use a small batch size, the minibatch gradient estimates at each step
become more noisy, but in turn we get to take more optimizer steps.
Large batch size
SGD
 SGD + momentum
Small batch size
Figure 10: Toy optimization problem. We compare the use of SGD and SGD with momentum on a
loss function defined as x + 10y2. We simulate a small and a large batch size by adding Gaussian
noise to the gradient estimate at each optimizer step. The error bars show a 50% interquartile range
sampled across different random seeds for the minibatch gradient noise.
In the top row of Figure 10, we see that when a large batch size is used, we only get to take a
small number of steps, and so in turn every step has to be large. Because the loss function is much
steeper in the vertical direction compared to the horizontal direction, the large step size results in
oscillations along the vertical direction. In this case, using momentum helps dampen the oscillations
along the vertical direction and speeds up convergence along the horizontal direction. In fact, in the
extreme case of full-batch gradient descent (which has no gradient noise), using momentum probably
improves the convergence rate of gradient descent for this toy problem [73].
We show the small batch size setting in the bottom row of Figure 10. Notice that since the batch
size is small, every step becomes more noisy, but in turn we can take more steps and reduce the size
of each step. As a result of decreasing the step size, the optimizer no longer overshoots along the
vertical direction, obviating the need for momentum. There are no longer any oscillations to dampen,
so using SGD with and without momentum results in similar performance.
19